The Joe Rogan experience.
And the other thing is, I don't know if you're familiar with this,
but there's now a connection between quantum computing and black holes.
Yeah. Yeah. What's that connection? It's a weird one. So it's all weird. Well,
this is like hyper. This is like weird squared or, or something,
but work over the last 20 has established that when you have a
black hole, actually even more general systems, but talk about a black hole.
There's an alternate description of a black hole in terms of what's known as the
whole graphic description.
It's as if there's a two dimensional world that surrounds any given three
dimensional world that has exactly the same physics as the three dimensional
world that we're familiar with.
And yet it describes it in a completely different language.
So a black hole gravity is obviously essential. That's how a black hole forms,
but in this dictionary that physicists have developed,
there's a description of a black hole that doesn't involve.
Gravity only involves quantum mechanics.
And the beautiful thing is the quantum processes in that quantum
world
mimic the kinds of processes that people have been developing for quantum
computing, quantum error, correction code,
and there's a dictionary that people have proposed for that quantum language
on the holographic boundary with physics in the interior.
And the dictionary shows that the quantum error correcting code may be the
reason why space time itself holds together.
So there's this bizarre way in which everything that we know about in the world
around us has a translated dictionary version in a different world that
lacks gravity, but has quantum mechanics. And so people are,
are using some of the insights from quantum computing to
understand questions about black holes in space time. So as.
Is that strange, that's so strange.
So as quantum computing expands much like as computing
expands, if you go back to the early NASA, computers are filled up a whole room,
we can extrapolate that as we get better at this,
and you look 50 years down the line from now,
quantum computing will be the standard to be the norm. Yep.
And it would probably radically alter our understanding of.
Everything, including black holes, including black holes. That's right.
So there's a real possibility that the language that we use for
space time and black holes may bear a profound imprint
of the language that we are developing to understand quantum computing,
quantum computers. I was just.
Reading some article about black holes roaming through the universe and that
some of them, some of 'em they're detached from.
Galaxies, right? They can be, I mean,
oftentimes people think about black holes as these Gargan S
that form from collapsed stars.
There's a big one in the center of our milk away.
Galaxy weighs 4 million times out of the sun,
the photograph of a black hole in the galaxy M 87 that got the world excited
a couple of years back, 55 million light years away,
billions of times the mass of the sun. But the reality is anything.
If you compress it enough, becomes a black hole.
If you take an orange and you squash an orange down sufficiently small,
according to Einstein, it becomes a black hole.
So these things don't have to be Gargan. When the flip side of it,
we also typically have an intuition that black holes are really dense, right?
That's usually the way we think about them.
But if you make something sufficiently large,
regardless of how low its density is, it will also become a black hole.
So you can make a black hole out of air by just having enough air.
If you have enough air sufficiently large sphere of air,
it would become a black hole too, with the density of air.
So all the intuitions that we typically have about black holes,
that they have to be dense and they have to be gargantuan, not right.
So.
Black holes are just a part of the elemental structure of reality
itself.
Yeah. When you look at Einstein's equation, right in his mathematics,
there's a little formula that you can see where it says,
if you have any mass M whatever mass you want,
and you squeeze it into a radius, R that's less than two times,
Newton's constant two G times M divided by C squared speed of light
squared, a formula details. Don't matter. You take any mass.
If the radius within which that mass sits is less than two GM overseas squared,
it is a black hole period. End of story. According to Einstein now,
Einstein left out quantum mechanics weirdly, right?
Because his Nobel prize was for quantum mechanics. It was for a paper.
He wrote 19 to five about the photo electric effect,
but he never really believed that quantum mechanics was the true
description of the world.
And when he was developing the general theory of relativity,
he was just thinking about gravity and not quantum mechanics.
Stephen Hawking came along in 1974 and started to inject quantum mechanics into
our understanding of things like black holes.
And that's where Hawking proved that black holes are not completely black.
He showed that black holes allow a certain amount of radiation to leak out of
their surface, leak out of the event,
arrives and or leak out from just beyond the edge of the event horizon. And so,
yes, when you think about black holes, as far as we can tell,
they are a fundamental quality of the world,
but you have with quantum physics to truly understand them.
And that's the cutting edge of what's happening right now. So.
They're a fundamental quality of the world,
but they're also in the center of every galaxy.
It seems to be the case.
The Sloan digital sky survey did a wonderful study of
a vast number of galaxies.
And I've seen wonderful images where they put like a little red circle around
all those galaxies that have a black hole in their center.
And there are red circles all over that imagery.
So it seems to be a ubiquitous quality that black holes are at the center of
galaxies. And those are typically gargantuan black holes, millions,
or billions of times the mass of the sun. Do we know.
Why they exist at the center of.
A galaxy? You know,
there's still a lot of uncertainty about gala galactic formation. You know,
some have suggested that early stars,
which were quite compared to more modern stars when they
exhausted their nuclear fuel. And they collapsed in on each other.
They created black holes that were large,
and then they continue to suck in more material from the environment and they
grew larger and larger still.
So that's sort of one rough way that people think about how these massive,
enormous black holes may have formed, but it's uncertain and LIGO, you know,
this laser interferometer gravitational wave observatory, gravitational waves.
It, it took headlines a few years ago when it detected the first ripples in the
fabric of space, it detected them from two black holes.
Mm-hmm <affirmative> that were 1.4 billion light years away,
like 1.4 billion years ago, rotating around each other,
going near the speed of light slamming into each other,
creating a tidal wave in the fabric of space that rippled outward at the speed
of light. Part of it raced toward planet earth.
There wasn't anybody on planet earth to see it at that moment,
but it had 1.4 billion year journey to traverse it raced toward planet
earth. When it's about a hundred thousand light years away,
grazes the Milky way gala, he continues to race toward earth.
When it's a hundred light years away,
a guy named Albert Einstein writes down equations that suggest there could be
these gravitational waves, unknown.
That one is already racing toward the planet, right?
And they continues to race on we two light days.
It's two light days away when they turn on the new fine version of the LIGO
detector. And two days later that wave rolls by planet or shakes two detectors.
One of the Louisiana,
they were Washington state giving us the first direct detection of ripples in
the fabric of space and establishing that the story that I told you is true.
Wow. You know, so, so these things are,
are real they're out there that wild. And,
and before the direct radio telescopic imagery from the event horizon telescope
of the black hole in M 87,
that ripple on the fabric space was the most direct evidence that black holes
are real because when you took the way that the machine in Louisiana,
Washington, it twitched for just, you know, a tiny fraction of a second,
when you've figured out using supercomputers,
what the cause of the wave must have been.
You are led to two black holes that are 28 and 31 times
the mass of the sun are 36 times the mass of the sun numbers of that sort.
And that was the only explanation for the data. And so there's this beautiful,
indirect proof that stellar size black holes
are actually out there. And then of course,
we take a photograph of one in a nearby galaxy.
So do we know why black holes would collide with each other?
Are they attracted to each other because of their masks?
It's a good question. Yeah. So certainly that is part of it.
So binary star systems are not uncommon.
They're fairly common where two stars will be orbiting around each other.
If those two stars exhaust their nuclear fuel,
they can each collapse to a black hole. That's one possibility,
or could be a black holes wandering through and capture.
There's another black hole. It's a possibility too. I mean, the thing,
go ahead and ask you a question about it's one point I wanna make as well,
which is, well, wasn't that please go. Yeah. Well,
it was just that many people have in mind that black hole sort of reach out and
grab everything in. Yeah.
But a black hole of mass M a black hole whose mass is the same as the sun has
the same gravitational pull the sun. It's not,
it doesn't pull any harder than the sun.
It's just that you can get closer to it because it's so small.
And therefore you can experience the gravity more strongly, but you know,
a brick of mass M and a black hole of mass M they exert the same.
Gravitational pull. Okay.
So we have this misconception that black holes are always these super massive
objects that have incredible amounts of gravity. Yeah.
And they're sucking in planets and stars and turning them out,
cuz we're thinking of massive black holes.
Like the super massive black holes are at the center of the galaxy. Yeah.
Which is like, what, one half of 1% of the mass, the galaxy. Well.
Let's see. So if, if our galaxy has say, uh,
a hundred sons, you know,
and that guy is about 4 million times the mass. So the son, yeah.
You're talking about, you know, a thousandth or something of that sort.
Isn't that crazy when you say that a hundred billion sons and you have to wrap
your head around the idea of a hundred billion stars and that's,
and that's just our little puny little galaxy. Well, that's a thing there.
Isn't that crazy. At least a hundred billion galaxies, at least.
And this is just in the observable of universe. I mean,
do you know if you take your thumb and you put your thumb on a nice clear night
and you block out a thumbnail worth of the sky,
you're blocking at about 10 million galaxies. <laugh>.
It's so crazy. It's so crazy. When, because those numbers, I,
I hear you say those numbers. I can repeat those numbers,
but I don't think I'm really internalizing them.
You can because they're so non-human scale, right? Yeah.
We've just never experienced anything like that at all.
And it could be that it's infinite space could go on infinitely far.
It could be that the galaxies continue onward infinitely far.
And therefore the numbers we're talking about could be minuscule on the scale of
the fullness of reality.
Catch new episodes that Joe Rogan experience for free only on Spotify,
watch back catalog J E videos on Spotify,
including clips easily seamlessly switch between video,
an audio experience on Spotify.
You can listen to the JRE in the background while using other apps and can
download episodes to save on data cost. All for free.
Spotify is absolutely free.
You don't have to have a premium account to watch new JRE episodes.
You just need to search for the JRE on your Spotify app.
Go to Spotify now to get this full episode of the Joe Rogan experience.